## Understanding the principles of successful meetings

There are many principles to having effective and successful meetings. I've identified six that you can use to make any meeting more effective. Throughout this course, you'll see examples of these six principles in action. The first principle is Purpose. Each meeting should have a clear purpose. Unfortunately, many of you have experienced meetings that were held simply because someone felt it was a good idea to have a meeting. The Principle of Purpose suggests that every meeting should have an objective, a reason why you're having the meeting.

Before scheduling a meeting and inviting others to attend, first ask yourself this question: what is the result I want from this meeting? As we go through this course, I'll provide guidance on how to make sure every meeting has a purpose. The second principle is Time. In other words, how long should the meeting be? There is no hard-and-fast rule about how long a meeting should be. However, there is a general principle that applies to nearly every meeting, and that principle is: the shorter, the better.

Time hates a vacuum. Meetings will almost always take as long or longer than you schedule them to last. Keep your meeting schedule concise and budget less time than you think is necessary. This will force participants to make wise decisions about how to use the time during the meeting. As we go through this course, I'll give you some guidance about how to determine what is an appropriate use of time for your meetings. The third principle is Agenda.

This principle goes hand in hand with the Principle of Time. An agenda is simply a step-by-step outline for participants to follow in the meeting. Agendas can help to wrangle unruly meetings that drift aimlessly. I'll provide suggested agendas that you can use for your meetings. We'll also discuss ways to use the agenda so every participant can have a voice in the meeting and participate. The fourth principle is Preparation. Preparation is vital to effective meetings.

Prior to attending the meeting every participant should take a few moments to prepare their questions and consider how they can serve others. I'll give you easy tips to make preparation very simple, something that doesn't take more than perhaps a few minutes but has a big impact on improving meeting effectiveness. The fifth principle is Focus. Focused meetings stay true to the stated purpose. Focused meeting participants stay engaged in the meeting.

They're listening and attentive and they avoid multitasking. In this course, I'll provide tips and tools to help meetings and participants stay focused. And the sixth and final principle is Leadership. Who is in charge of the meeting? The meeting leader may be an executive, a manager, or a designated meeting facilitator. Regardless of who that person is or what position they hold, every meeting can benefit from having a leader.

The leader's job is to make sure that the other five effective meeting principles are followed. They help the meeting stay on target, toward accomplishing the purpose of the meeting. They help make sure that the meeting begins and ends on time. The leader keeps the meeting on agenda, and the leader helps others prepare for the meeting and stay focused. In summary, the six principles are Purpose, Time, Agenda, Preparation, Focus, and Leadership.

Everything that I'll share with you in this course is based upon these six principles. They form the foundation of effective meetings.

## Using technology

Meetings and technology seem to go hand in hand. As technology has advanced, so have the ways and opportunities that we have to meet with each other. With each advancement in transportation, telephony, the Internet, or whatever advances come in the future, we experience new opportunities to connect together. However, each new advancement also offers challenges. Far too many meetings are stalled or drag on because of problems with the technology involved.

To make your meetings more effective for you and for the other participants, we've provided a very simple checklist that the meeting leader can use prior to every meeting. These simple guides will help you double-check all of your resources and make sure that technology is a helpful resource and not an aggravating frustration. There are three basic areas that this checklist covers. The first area deals with telephones, the second deals with audio/visual, and then finally video, or web conferencing.

It's a good practice to use this checklist approximately one hour prior to each meeting to make sure that every aspect of technology has been double-checked and is working. A couple of things to keep in mind as you use this checklist: First, it's designed for small ongoing meetings that usually occur inside of a company or other organization. This checklist is not designed for large events or seminars. Also, this checklist is designed to be very generic and adaptable to a wide variety of situations.

So if a few items on the checklist don't apply to your situation, feel free to ignore them. Also, we've left a few blanks on each checklist to give you room to add your own items to double-check before a meeting. By taking just a few minutes of careful preparation for your technical needs, you'll find meetings will go smoother and technology will do what it's meant to do, which is help meetings to be more effective.

## Meeting virtually (audio and video conferencing)

As technology advances, so do the methods for meeting. One of the most common uses of technology for meetings right now is virtual attendance, or webcam. For simplicity, I'll define virtual attendance as someone using technology to attend without physically being in the room. Often a participant will use an Internet-based webcam to show their face and see the face of others in attendance. Virtual attendance could also mean participating via telephone or audio only.

Let's start with a comparison of attending via telephone versus video. Video can be an effective tool for smaller groups or one-to-one meetings, as it allows people to see facial expressions and body language, a critical component of communication. However, video works best in situations with a small number of attendees, around eight or less. In my experience, meetings with many people attending via video can become very distracting.

Also, the more video cameras you add to a meeting the higher number of technical problems you're likely to have. So generally speaking, if you have a large number of virtual attendees, I recommend you use telephone conferencing instead of video conferencing. There are downsides to telephone attendance though. While it's fairly simple for anyone to jump right into a meeting via phone, it's hard for each person to have an opportunity to be heard.

There are many great telephone conferencing options on the market that will allow a leader to see all the attendees who are on the call, allow the attendees to indicate they have something to say, and give people an opportunity to be called on one at a time. In any meeting it's the leader's job to make sure that each person has the opportunity to be heard. In a virtual setting it becomes even more important for the leader to ensure everyone has a voice.

Leaders should be especially aware of each attendee and if one person has been quiet the entire time. Ask polite, but direct questions such as, we haven't heard from you for a while, do you have any comment? Just as an effective classroom teacher wants to pay more attention to the students that may be hiding in the back of the classroom, so also should the group leader make sure that all members of the meeting are participating.

One last comment about virtual attendance, later in the course we'll discuss ground rules, such as being on time and having an agenda. Any ground rule or system that you use for face-to-face meetings also applies to virtual attendees.

## Understanding the importance of time management

To me, time management is really about the management of the individual, how you operate efficiently and effectively. I recommend that each individual that participates in your meetings also completes the Time Management course. Your effectiveness in time management will have a great impact on your ability to be prepared for each meeting, pay attention during the meeting, and more importantly, take action on the agreements that you make with others during the meetings.

##  Deciding between group and one-to-one meetings

This course teaches you how to effectively hold two types of meetings: meetings with a group of people and one-to-one meetings. Group meetings are for three or more people, and one-to-one meetings are for just two people meeting face to face or through conferencing. Although the principles of effective meetings remain the same whether you're having a group meeting or a one-to-one meeting, the specific processes and tools that you use for these meetings are very different. So it's helpful if you understand the differences between these two types of meetings.

Group meetings are best for companywide or group-wide development, collaboration, and coordination. They're very effective when you want to brainstorm with many different people in a focused setting. They're also affected in coordinating the calendars among many different people, perhaps in a department with a project. One-to-one meetings, on the other hand, are best used for handling the fine details of day-to-day work, such as the quick questions that happen throughout your day when your coworkers call you, email you, or knock on your door.

These kinds of questions can be bundled together and discussed in a regularly scheduled one-to-one meeting. One-to-one meetings are fantastic opportunities for individuals to be heard and validated on a very personal level. I recommend that businesses use both group and one-to-one meetings. Typically, group meetings can be held less often than one-to-one meetings. For example, you might meet weekly on a one-to-one basis with a coworker who asks you questions, but might meet with all the members of your department as a group once per month.

Both types of meeting serve a unique and vital purpose. In this course, I will first cover principles that apply to every type of meeting, especially group meetings, and then later focus on tips and techniques unique to one-to-one meetings.

## Determining whether a meeting is necessary

I once coached a client to help her with her time management. In the course of our training we analyzed her calendar and realized that meetings were sucking dry nearly all of her available time. She was so busy in multiple meetings every day that she had almost no time available to perform any real work. While I would hope that this situation is unusual, it's becoming more and more common for people in business today. When someone feels that they need to discuss something, their first thought is often, "Let's hold a meeting.

Let's get everyone together." I would propose a different approach. When you feel the need to invite other people to participate with you in a meeting, first ask the question, can we take care of this without having a meeting? Or even better, how can we take care of this without having a meeting? I'm going to give you a few questions you can ask that may help you discover whether or not the meeting is necessary. The first question to ask is, do we have all the information that we need for a meeting? Take a moment to consider whether or not everything you need will be there.

If not, schedule a reminder for yourself to revisit the idea of having a meeting once the necessary information is available. The second question to ask is, do we need to discuss and collaborate or are we just going to delegate and calendar? What we're trying to avoid is a situation where 10 people are sitting in the room while a leader delegates tasks one by one to each of the people in the room. These items can usually be handled through one-to-one conversations or even through email.

The third question is, is it critical that we're all on the same page? If the answer is no then this may be better handled with one leader holding many individual conversations. This allows everyone else to continue working effectively and not have to wait during the meeting. And the fourth and final question is, is this meeting one of our most valuable activities? Most valuable activities are the activities that you perform that bring the greatest impact to the bottom line of the business.

If a handful of people could handle the issues of the meeting while others are out working on activities that bring the most value to the company then find a way to excuse them. They could always be caught up on the meeting through summary notes or an email later. There is no hard-and-fast rule about when you should or should not meet. However, by asking these four questions you'll avoid many of the unnecessary meetings that take place.

## Scheduling the meeting

The best way to have a group meeting is on a recurring schedule. There are four considerations when it comes to scheduling group meetings: frequency, rhythm, technology, and reminders. First let's talk about frequency. Frequency simply refers to how often you should meet and how long the meeting should be. As a general rule, the more often you meet the shorter the meeting should be. Conversely, the less often you meet the longer the meeting should be. For example, if we have one meeting per month as a company then that meeting maybe 50 or even 80 minutes long.

If, however, you feel it's necessary to have a meeting once per week then that meeting should be much shorter, perhaps 25 minutes long. Second let's consider the rhythm, specifically the rhythm of the business. Every business has a unique rhythm to it, times and days when you're more likely to be interrupted or where the workload is going to be the heaviest. For example, consider a sales department. There are key times of the week when sales rep should be out making contacts and transactions.

Consider the times when you're least likely to be interrupted and when there aren't other important things that should be taking place. The third consideration is technology, in particular the technology that you use to schedule the meeting. There are many fantastic tools available to help with scheduling meetings. They can help you see the schedules of every person that you're inviting to the meeting, that allow you to suggest multiple times to multiple people, and will even handle the coronation for you. When it comes to finding a time to meet as a group, whether it's recurring or just one time, use one of these technology tools. Let the technology do the work for you. It will save you hours of frustration and a lack of focus.

And finally, when scheduling a meeting consider how reminders will be sent out. By sending reminders you make it easy for people to keep the date and time. You give them a moment to remember the meeting and recommit to attend. I recommend two kinds of reminders. First, use automatic computer reminders. All calendaring programs have the opportunity to create a reminder for yourself when scheduling a meeting. I recommend that you use that feature. Set a reminder as far off before the meeting as you feel is necessary and if you're scheduling with other people, encourage them to do the same.

The second type is the personal reminder. The easiest way to remind others is through email. For example, you can have one member of the team assigned the responsibility of sending a brief email to everyone reminding them of the meeting time and location. Consider the frequency, rhythm, technology, and reminders when scheduling your group meetings and you'll make the best use of your meeting time.

## Establishing ground rules

Ground rules are an effective tool to help you get the most from your meetings. Ground rules allow every participant to know the established conduct and culture of your meetings. I'd like to suggest several ground rules you can use for your meetings. The first ground rule is the most critical and it is, no multitasking during meetings. Not only will multitasking make meetings slower, increase mistakes, and raise stress levels; it'll also cause other participants to feel they aren't valued.

As a group, commit to being 100% focused on the meeting and not performing any other tasks during the scheduled time. The second ground rule builds on the first and it is, used only an agreed upon technology. Can people take notes on cell phones? Can they take notes on laptops? Is any technology permitted? Not surprisingly, this is a somewhat controversial subject. Some companies find that they have to remove technology completely from the meeting. There's no right or wrong answer though.

Find a guideline that works for the group, so that everyone's expectations are the same. The next suggested ground rule is, one person speaks at a time and everyone else listens. This means that while someone else is expressing their opinion we sit respectfully, listen thoughtfully, and allow others to complete their sentence without finishing what they're saying. It's a simple rule, yet I'd offer one word of caution. Often I find the most common violator of his rule is the meeting leader.

They sometimes feel that that is their prerogative to jump in and interrupt what other people are saying. The leader should take care to set an example for this and any other ground rules you adopt. The fourth suggested ground rule is, speak openly without fear. Meetings are most productive when they're conducted in a safe environment, where people feel that they can express their opinion even if sometimes those opinions are controversial or unpopular.

By establishing a ground rule that says we can speak openly without fear, you'll get the best results. And the fifth and final rule I suggest is simply begin on time and end on time. If everyone is committed to this, participants will be more respectful of the time of others, and people will enjoy the meeting more. As a group, decide which rules you want to adopt and then formalize them in a written document afterward. Of course over time you may add ground rules to the list or adapt them to your situation.

## Determining who is in charge

In order for your meetings to move smoothly, get results, and help everyone feel respected, you'll want to have a meeting leader. It's your choice what to call the leader: a coach, a mentor, president, facilitator, whatever title you feel is appropriate. I'll simply refer to this person as the meeting leader. It's the leader's responsibility to make sure that everyone follows the agenda and that the ground rules are respected. They also act as the timekeeper during the meeting. There are a few different ways to choose the meeting leader.

The first and most obvious method is based on position, meaning that whoever is the highest position in the room, whether that's the manager, CEO, project leader, or executive, is the meeting leader. The advantage of this method is that there's already an established structure of reporting and accountability. Also, this method gives the leader a direct opportunity to provide development to the group. The disadvantages of this method are that it may not develop leadership in other members of the group.

Also, sometimes having the highest position as meeting leader may leave other people feeling that the meeting is always controlled or dominated by one person. The second option for choosing the meeting leader is by rotation. This means that the meeting leader is different every time. Any kind of rotation will work, provided it gives each member the opportunity to lead. The advantages to this method is that it gives attendees who aren't normally in leadership positions the opportunity to grow and practice leadership in small ways.

Additionally, if each member of the group has the opportunity to hold others accountable to the ground rules, it often increases their own personal commitment to those rules. And finally, there is a feeling of satisfaction that most people get when they have the opportunity to lead. The disadvantages are that occasionally a leader selected by rotation may not be committed to the ground rules, causing meetings to stray. You may also have people who don't want to lead, perhaps because it's contrary to their personality.

Also, a temporary group leader may not be as prepared as someone who's consistently used to leadership. And finally, in a group meeting people may have the tendency to still look at the person that is normally the leader outside of the group meeting as the person in charge anyway, leaving a leader by rotation in an awkward situation. Some may feel that there is a third option, that is, to have no leader for the meeting. This happens often by accident and usually leads to chaotic, unproductive meetings.

Also, occasionally people are reluctant to take charge of a meeting due to social pressure. They feel that having a leader for the meeting diminishes the role of everyone else in the room. My philosophy on leadership, in any situation, including meetings, is that the leader is the servant. Think of the leader as the helper for the meeting. It's their job to help the meeting be successful. Take a moment, either right now or at the beginning of your next meeting, and determine what method you'll use to make sure that every meeting has a leader.

## Having an agenda

We've provided a suggested agenda that you can use for your meetings. You're welcome to adapt this agenda or create your own version for your needs, but if you want to get going quickly, you can use this agenda exactly as is. I'm going to briefly talk about each of the elements. First, on the left-hand side of the agenda you'll see a list of important milestones to keep in mind while you're having your meeting. This isn't the step-by-step portion of the agenda, but rather, the principles to keep in mind for the meeting.

Of all the principles listed, the most important one is the what, the vision or the end result? You're welcome to adapt this vision as written. My suggested vision is, at the end of each meeting all participants will feel respected, valued, and have clarity about future action steps. Each person will grow to trust each other more, and the group as a whole will move closer toward completing its objectives. Now, let's talk about the agenda steps themselves, the how.

How should the meeting take place? The first step is to begin on time. Second, the leader welcomes everyone. The leader should help attendees feel welcome and comfortable when they come to the meeting. Third, there should be a brief development presentation, taught either by the leader or by someone that the leader has designated. This development should only be about 3 to 5 minutes and should either apply to a system that people within the company should begin implementing or provide development on some essential skill that applies to every attendee.

Step four of the group meeting agenda is to have each person quickly report on commitments they made in the last meeting. This is simply asking each person one by one whether or not they did it. Each person responds with a yes or no. Next, you'll take the remaining time available minus 5 minutes and divide it equally among the members. So if there are 30 minutes remaining and there are 5 participants, then each person will have 5 minutes to speak.

During that time each attendee will go through a list that they prepared and brought to the meeting. Then, as needed, attendees will make commitments to help the other members of the group. During the final 5 minutes the leader or the note taker reviews and summarizes each person's commitments that they made during the meeting. Then they'll also reconfirm the date and time of the next meeting. The final step of the agenda is to end on time, or early. The agenda is very simple: It's in following the agenda where the challenge comes.

In the next videos I'll break down each part of the agenda to help make your meetings successful.

## Preparing development

A part of both one-to-one and group meetings is to provide some brief development to the group. Some people call this training, teaching, or motivation. In this course, we'll simply refer to it as development. We don't want to spend a great deal of time on this portion of the meeting, but a brief development helps everyone get on the same page and helps them further their skills. If you're the meeting leader, keep in mind you may not necessarily be the one that needs to teach the development every time; in fact, it's probably a good idea to allow others in the group to take a hand at teaching some brief development.

If someone else's teaching, I'd suggest you have them watch this video and the video about teaching development. In a brief video like this it's impossible for me to teach you everything there is to learn about preparing development, so I'm going to give you the single biggest shortcut that I've learned in preparing a lesson. Take a piece of paper and draw a line down the middle of it. Then at the top of the left-hand side write the word "what" and at the top of the right-hand side write the word "how." Preparing development is simply a matter of balance between what, meaning the skill or system that you're teaching and how, the method that you use to teach it to people.

If you have too much what, meaning you attempt to cover too many concepts, then your listeners will be overwhelmed with information. Too much how, meaning use too many methods of sharing your principal, and pretty soon people just get lost in the method and miss out on the message. First decide on the what. There are two options for deciding what to teach. The first is to provide development on a new system that should be implemented. The second is, provide development on some essential skill universal to all the members.

In a three-to-five minute development you're only going to have time for one simple concept, so choose carefully. After you've decided on the what, you can determine the how, the method you'll use to teach the concept. To help with the how, I'll give you three basic techniques that are very effective for development in a group meeting. The first and perhaps easiest is to share a story. Stories are very simple and effective because they invite your listeners to imagine things that are taking place.

A simple story can often illustrate your point better than if you just directly tell someone what to do. The best stories are true stories, particularly of things that happen in the workplace, experiences with customers or even from your career. This second method of teaching a group deals with group participation. The greatest teachers try not to do all the talking but instead invite their listeners to participate in what's taking place. Simple examples include turn to the person next to you and share one positive experience you've had with the customer, or make a group of three people and in 60 seconds agree on the two best words to describe excellent customer service.

By inviting group members to take action, you'll quickly and simply move your development from a dull lecture to energetic involvement. Give specific amounts of time for people to perform activities; otherwise group discussions can sometimes take much longer than you intend. The third method of development is to work together as a group to solve a problem. This encourages participation and questions. Simply state the problem and then ask group members for suggestions for improvement.

For instance, you can ask our delivery shipments are often late, what suggestions could you make to help improve this? This method is especially effective in a group because it gets buy-in from all the members and provides perspective from multiple people. Again, be cautious of the amount of time that you take and keep the comments brief. In summary, first decide what concept you will teach and then decide how you're going to teach it, either using stories, group participation, or group problem solving.

In a future video I'll provide tips on teaching what you prepared.

## Coming prepared

You can help make the meeting effective for both yourself and others by coming prepared. Coming prepared means more than just arriving at the meeting, listening, and occasionally talking. I'll give you a brief checklist to help you be prepared for your meetings. First, use a meeting task list. If you've completed the Time Management Fundamentals course on lynda.com, you'll be familiar with using a task list for processed items. You can also create a list for each meeting that you participate in.

For instance, any time that you have a task or idea that you need to discuss in a group meeting, put that idea in a group task list, for example group: Project Managers Meeting. Create similar lists for all the groups and one-to-one meetings that you participate in regularly. When you come to the meeting bring that list, either via your laptop, a mobile device, or even a printed list.

This will help you be prepared with minimal review prior to the meeting. This will also save time for all participants, so that they don't need to wait while others gather their thoughts as to what they need to discuss. Each member can just open up their list and go. The second way to prepare is to bring any action items that you committed to complete in the previous meeting. Every meeting you're likely to have one or more things that you committed to others that you would complete.

Make sure you're prepared to report back to the group on your commitments. The third way to be prepared is to bring development materials if necessary. In most cases only the leader or development presenter will need to bring development materials. Occasionally the presenter will have emailed or handed out documents and asked people to bring these in advance for the development presentation. If that's the case, just make sure that you have all the materials that you need.

Next, you'll need to bring your personal calendar. Many times people will come to a meeting and find themselves unable to schedule things or commit to accomplishing things without being able to look at their calendar, so make sure that you have your calendar at hand. It's your time budget and it will let you know how much time you have available to make commitments. Finally, bring a gathering point for taking notes. A gathering point is a predetermined place where you put all the notes from your meeting.

Typically in a meeting setting it's going to be a notepad, or perhaps a method where you electronically send notes to yourself. Use this five-point checklist to arrive prepared for your meetings. With just a few minutes of preparation prior to the meeting, you can attend feeling confident that you'll be able to participate fully.

## Budgeting time

The first step on the agenda is to begin on time. I view time like a budget. Stay within your time budget and you will be more productive and relaxed. Exceed your time budget and you will be unproductive and have more stress. It's the meeting leader's responsibility to make sure that the group stays within the budget. The agenda we provided is fairly straightforward on suggestions for dividing your meeting time. When it comes to the development presentation, ensure that it's brief, five minutes at the most.

This will require you to be well prepared, and this course will include some quick and easy tips to help you prepare and teach the development. Next, when each person reports on the commitments they made in the last meeting, be as brief as possible. Keep the reporting to under five minutes. The most fluid portion of your time budget deals with how much time each attendee has to be heard. For example, let's say that you have a 60-minute meeting that ends at 11 o'clock, and you complete the development and reporting by 10:15, so there are 45 minutes remaining.

Subtract five minutes from that to leave time for wrap up at the end. This leaves 40 minutes. If you have five participants in the meeting, including the meeting leader, divide 40 by 5, and you end up with 8 minutes for each attendee. Then the meeting leader should set up a timer, so that each person knows exactly how much time they have. Let the timer be the enforcer of the time budget rather than you as the individual. People are much more comfortable with the clock beeping at them than with the leader saying, "It's time for you to stop talking." Using our example, we have set the timer for 8 minutes.

Then immediately begin with the first attendee. The leader can listen attentively to each person and occasionally glance at the clock. I recommend that you give each person a brief reminder one minute before the time is up. In the beginning, people may be a little uncomfortable with the concept of being so careful with the clock. They may feel it restrictive. Typically though, by the third or fourth meeting conducted this way, people understand and they respect the clock. They understand that it not only helps them be heard, but the people around them as well.

Stick with the time budget and you'll find that meetings become a much more effective use of your time.

## Taking minutes

Ever heard of the concept of taking minutes in the meeting? The idea is that one person acts as a scribe and summarizes comments and points covered in the meeting. To some this may seem like an outdated or unnecessary concept, yet I've found that this can be a very effective tool to make sure that everyone is on the same page, both during and after the meeting. First, you'll want to designate someone as the note taker. You can rotate this responsibility; however, I've found that there are some people best suited for this.

These individuals usually have a high attention to detail, and they're very fast note takers. However, you decide to do it, I'd recommend that the meeting leader chooses one person to be the note taker for each meeting. Next, to make the task simple for that note taker, we've provided an outline of how to take notes. Use this outline as is or adapt to your situation. At the top of the form you'll find places to indicate the leader, the note taker, and the date and time of the meeting.

When it comes to the note taking itself, I recommend that the note taker focuses notes on actions rather than trying to cover each word a person says. Listen for and take notes about doing, changing, and making things happen, both inside and outside the group. For example, when summarizing the development portion of the meeting, you might write one sentence about what the development was and then add one or two bullet points about actions that you can take as a result.

When taking notes, make bullet points of the commitments people make. For instance, if during the meeting I commit to Bonnie that I'm going to deliver a document to her next Tuesday, then make a note "Dave will deliver the document to Bonnie by next Tuesday." You'll use these notes in two ways. At the end of the meeting you'll summarize the notes to help with making sure that each person knows their commitments from the meeting. Then after the meeting the note taker can send an email with the notes to everyone who was in attendance, or even was absent. That way everyone has a chance to review again what was covered, and if anyone missed the meeting, they can also feel like they caught the key points of what was discussed.

Keep note taking as simple as possible. The end result we want is to help people follow through on their commitments and strengthen the communication between attendees.

## Opening

How you open the meeting is very important, as it has a great impact on the overall effectiveness of the meeting. Everybody has the responsibility to open the meeting on a positive note; however, the greatest responsibility does rest with the meeting leader, so I'll focus my training in this video with the leader in mind. There are five steps that you can take to open meetings positively. Number one is arrive early. Because part of the agenda is to start the meeting on time, you want to arrive well in advance of the meeting, I would say at least five minutes in advance and ready to go the moment everyone arrives.

The second step is to eliminate distractions. If you have a computer monitor that's on and may distract you, turn it off. If there's music playing, turn it off. If your meeting area is not as tidy as it could be, take a few moments to clean up and arrange the chairs. Make sure that any trash is put away. Any distraction to one of the five senses can get in the way of an effective meeting. Take a moment and make sure that anything distracting has been put away, so that you can focus 100% on the meeting.

The third step is to greet people when they arrive. Ever had the experience of going to a meeting where the leader is working on their computer when you walk in? What a missed opportunity! Instead establish a positive tone for your meeting by being ready to greet people warmly and personally before the meeting gets started. The fourth step deals with how you set the tone for the meeting. As the leader, the first words that you say and how you say them will set the tone for everything else that takes place.

Be positive. Share some good news. For example, you could begin by saying, "I just want to start by sharing some great feedback I got from a client yesterday. He sent me an email and said that Janet went above and beyond for them last week, and they love working with us." The final step is to take just a brief moment and talk about the purpose of the meeting. Go through the ground rules again or read the company vision, values, or mission statement. Whatever the purpose of your group meeting is, take a moment to remind all the participants of that purpose.

Use these five quick steps and you'll start the meetings on a positive note and get everybody ready to participate and take action.

## Presenting the development

In the previous video I showed you how to prepare a brief three-to-five minute development presentation for the meeting. Now it's time to teach what you prepared. So I'd like to give you a few suggestions to help that be as effective as possible. Even if you don't feel that teaching or training other people is your greatest strength, every person can be a teacher in their own way and can help others grow. The first tip that I would give you is, grab their attention. No matter how prepared the lesson, begin with something that's positive, interesting and perhaps a little bit out of the ordinary. Why? Well, typically when someone comes into the meeting their attention is all over the place. You can think of it in terms of them looking up and down, to the sides, all over the place.

They may be thinking about what they were just working on, things that are going on in their personal life, or the game that they saw on TV last night. You want something that pulls their attention toward you. Not only will this help you be better able to teach, but it will also help them be prepared for an effective meeting. So do something this attention grabbing. The easiest way to do that is to use some sort of visual aid. Simply hold up a picture or some object that relates to the lesson that you're teaching.

The second tip is to speak as little as possible. One way to think about this is imagine the phrase "their words" in big letters and imagine the phrase "my words" in small letters. This means the things they say matter more than what you say. Give attendees an opportunity to be heard, to speak, and to participate, and certainly when they're speaking he respectful of their comments and pay full attention to them.

The third tip relates to the second, and that is, allow attendees to discover for themselves. This is why in the video on how to prepare your development I gave you the how method of group discussion. Compare these two differences in teaching something. Method one, I tell the attendees, "We need to listen to our customers." Method two, I ask attendees, "How can we do a better job of listening to our customers?" By asking a question rather than giving a solution, you'll help attendees learn and internalize more.

The greatest teachers I've seen ask students questions and give them time to think about their answers and respond rather than dominating the discussion by doing all the talking. The final tip is, keep it brief. At most you should spend five minutes. Stay within that time. The attendees know the agenda, and they know the maximum amount of time that you have to teach. Every word that you say beyond that time diminishes what you said before.

So when you reach the end of your allotted time, no matter where you are, just stop, finish your sentence, and allow the meeting to continue. By doing that you will gain the respect of those that you teach because you demonstrated that you respect their time. So in summary, when teaching your development: first, grab their attention; second, speak as little as possible; third, let them discover for themselves; and forth, keep it brief.

By teaching this way, you make it easier for the attendees to feel involved and committed to take action.

## Following up on commitments

After the development portion is complete, it's time to report on commitments. If you're following the agenda we've provided, attendees will have committed to action items at the conclusion of the previous meeting. We now want to receive reports on the status of commitments from all attendees. This process is actually very simple. The leader using the minutes from the previous meeting reads through the commitments each person made and asks simply, did you do this? If the answer is yes, then the leader can say something briefly, like "good job" or "thank you," but what if the answer is no? The leader should then ask something like, "what got in the way of completing that?" or "what obstacle did you encounter?" This is much more effective than asking a "why" question such as "why didn't you do this?" Why is a very strong word and often carries with it the assumption of personal blame.

By substituting what stood in the way for why, you are leaving open the possibility to many different reasons that could have kept the person from completing their assigned task. The leader should not respond with anything further at this time. We just want a brief explanation of what prevented the attendee from completing the commitment. If this explanation generates a topic that the group or the leader wishes to discuss further, then add it to the task list to be discussed at a later time.

Regardless of their responses, finish with brief, specific, and sincere praise. By always giving brief sincere praise, you become someone that's a trusted resource, rather than a demanding taskmaster. People will welcome you insight and become more forthcoming about errors when they happen. One last comment for managers: if you notice a pattern of someone not completing their commitments, you'll likely want to follow up with that person in a one-to-one meeting, not in a group meeting.

The one-to-one meeting is a great time for a manager to assist employees in following through on commitments or deal with deeper personal issues that may be influencing their lack of follow-through. Keep the meeting moving along and focused on actions and results. By taking this approach, you'll ensure commitments are completed and meetings are productive.

## Giving everyone a voice

One of the most important and occasionally challenging aspects of holding a group meeting is making sure that everyone has a voice, that every attendee has the opportunity to participate and be involved. In the video on budgeting time within a meeting I showed you how you can divide the remaining time evenly between the attendees. Once attendees begin speaking, it's the meeting leader's responsibility to ensure that everyone else is attentive and listening.

If one attendee is speaking out of turn when it's another attendee's time to speak, the leader should gently suggest that they listen. An easy way to do that without calling out someone in particular by name is saying "let's give Susan our full attention." Usually, just by saying that it's enough to help attendees stop whatever side conversations or activities that may have drifted into the course of the meeting. It's also the leader's responsibility to make sure that the person uses only the amount of time allotted to them.

On the other hand, each attendee has the responsibility to be prepared and to use their time wisely. That's why prior to the meeting every participant should bring their group task list, the list of things that they want to discuss during that meeting. If, as the person speaking, you find that you have a long list, you're going to need to move very quickly through that list--either that or you may need to have a separate conversation with each person. Try to keep your comments to items that applied to the group as a whole.

You don't necessarily need to cover every item in the group meeting, only those things where collaboration or coordination with the group is necessary. You can have private, one-on-one conversations, or even exchange emails on items that don't affect the group of whole. If you'd like to brainstorm ideas briefly with other members of the group, now would be the time to do this. Ask for brief responses to a specific question. Listen respectfully to each suggestion.

Write down what they say and say" thank you" for each idea, regardless of whether or not you agree with it. After the meeting is over, when you're processing, you can either discard ideas or contact people to discuss those ideas in greater depth. Also, keep in mind that it may not be necessary to use the full time that's given to you. If you can say everything that needs to be said in a shorter amount of time then go ahead and pass on your extra time to the next person.

No one has ever complained about someone else using less than their allotted time or about a meeting getting out early. Finally, if as you're speaking someone makes a commitment to you to do something, make a note to yourself to follow up with that person. Even though there's a note taker and the leader in the room who will make notes of that commitment, it's ultimately your responsibility to follow up with someone who makes a commitment to you. So in summary, keep track of the commitments that you make and keep track of the commitments that others make to you.

When everyone has a voice and everyone uses their time wisely, your meetings will be very productive.

## Giving and taking feedback

Through the course of a group meeting, sooner or later someone will have an alternative viewpoint or have feedback to offer. When that happens, there are a few rules of thumb to keep in mind to make sure that the meeting moves along and that the feedback is positive. The first rule of thumb that I recommend to all attendees is to focus your comments on actions and on results. All too often, it's easy to assume the motives behind what someone says or to get caught up in personality differences.

For the purpose of a group meeting, it's important to leave the personality, assumptions, and emotions out of the equation. Focus simply on the actions, meaning the steps that people are taking, and the results that they're getting from those actions. What did their actions achieve? If you focus your comments on actions and results, the likelihood of emotion getting mixed into the feedback becomes very low. The second rule of thumb that I would give you is use softening words that leave room for the possibility that you could be wrong.

I also call this the Ben Franklin Principal. In his autobiography, Franklin recounted how he had the habit of stating his opinions very strongly. A friend took him aside and said that by saying the same things, but with softening words, people would be more likely to listen to his opinion. From that point forward, Franklin made a personal commitment to stop using words like "certainly" and "undoubtedly" and replace them with "I imagine" and "it appears" to me.

For example, rather than saying "it absolutely must be the color green," say "to me it seems like green would be a good choice." Not only will that make others more receptive to your point of view, but it will also give you the opportunity to correct yourself if it turns out later that your opinion was wrong. The third suggestion that I would give you is be open, be receptive. When someone shares something with you that appears to be criticism or even positive feedback, avoid responding to it immediately.

Say, thank you, make a note about it and think about it later. As you pause for reflection, you may find out that what they say is true and even if you don't agree with their perspective, you'll be able to craft a response later when you're calm and relaxed. And finally, my fourth suggestion is for the meeting leader in particular. If a heated discussion grows, the recurring group meeting is not the time and place to have that discussion. Usually, it's a better idea to schedule a separate meeting to deal with specific heated issues.

While you want to avoid excessive meetings, holding a special meeting for an emotionally charged issue can be a wise choice. A separate freeform meeting will give you plenty of time to cover every opinion and give people the freedom to relax and not feel that they're under the pressure of the clock. Follow these four rules of thumb when it comes to giving and receiving feedback and your meetings will stay productive and focused on results.

## Keeping meetings productive and on topic

To keep meetings moving smoothly and on time, it's very important that we keep the meeting on topic. Keeping the meeting on topic is not just the meeting leader's responsibility; it's every attendee's responsibility. However, the leader is the one who will most likely need to make small corrections if people get off course. It's natural that occasionally a meeting will drift off topic or off course. When that happens, just follow a few simple tips to bring things back on topic.

The first tip is that if someone gets off topic or is disruptive, avoid singling them out by name. Instead, direct your comments to the group as a whole. For instance, if someone starts to talk while it's another attendee's turn to speak, simply say, "let's all give Jonathan our full attention." Or if someone multitasks during the discussion, say, "let's all make sure we're not multitasking." A simple reminder to the group as a whole is usually enough, especially if you have established ground rules.

This leads me to my second suggestion: refer to the ground rules often. If an attendee does something that's keeping the meeting from being productive, again rather than singling them out or talking about their specific behavior, go back to the ground rules. For instance, if you feel that someone is holding back, you can refer to the ground rule by saying, "we've all agreed to be open and share our thoughts fully. Let's all speak candidly." And finally, to keep the meeting productive, use a timer rather than yourself to do the reminding.

Get a simple kitchen timer with a loud alarm. A loud alarm makes it easier for the timer to be the enforcer of the time budget, not the leader. If the timer buzzes and you're still speaking when your time is up, just quickly finish your sentence and then say "I'm done for now," and allow someone else to start speaking. If you're the leader and someone continues past the buzzer, just say "let's make sure that we give the next person their full time." Hopefully, everyone understands the ground rules and they'll be respectful of the time and they'll keep the meeting moving forward and productive.

Occasionally though, the leader will need to provide gentle reminders to keep everyone on track.

## Reviewing action items and closing the meeting

The final step in the agenda is to review everyone's action items. Throughout the meeting, different people may have committed to accomplish certain things by a certain time. Usually at this point the leader will turn the time over to the note taker and ask them for a summary of the commitments. The note taker then summarizes each person's commitments using who, what, and when. In other words, who made the commitment, what they committed to do, and when they committed to accomplish it. It's that simple.

Go through each person on the agenda, look for the commitments they made, and say "Alex committed to deliver the files to Lisa by Tuesday afternoon." Who, what, when. As the note taker reads through the list, each attendee should pay close attention and make sure that they agreed to the commitments that are being reviewed. They also need to make sure that they've put those commitments they've made into one of their gathering points. A gathering point is a designated place where you write the action items down and then look at them later to decide when to follow through on them.

After reviewing everyone's action items, it's time for the leader to close the meeting. The leader does this by simply confirming the next time that the meeting is scheduled, the place where the meeting will be held, and also confirming any other additional meetings. For instance, if something needed to be discussed in greater depth outside of the regular meeting schedule, the leader will remind everyone of that special meeting and make sure they have it on the calendar. Just to emphasize, end on time, or even better, end early.

When you consistently end meetings at the scheduled time, people will become used to the idea that time matters and that how they use their time during the meeting is important. They'll be more respectful of the meeting because they know that their time is valued. In short, respect everyone else's time and they'll respect your time.

## Reviewing minutes

At the end of the group meeting, the note taker or leader should have a list of minutes using the note-taking template we've provided for you. The note taker should also make a copy of all those minutes and send them to you through email or another method so that you have the opportunity to review the notes later on. When you receive the minutes, take a moment and review them carefully. In particular, pay close attention to any time your name is mentioned, especially wherever it says that you made a commitment to someone else.

What you're looking for are any differences between what the minutes say and what you thought was actually discussed. This is just to ensure that there is clarity between all attendees. If for some reason you see something that the note taker missed and you feel it's important that every attendee be clear about it, send a message back to the note taker and to the meeting leader with your suggestion. That gives them both an opportunity to send out the clarification to all other attendees if necessary. By taking just a brief moment to review the meeting minutes, you will avoid confusion and stay on the same page with all the other attendees.

## Completing action items

Whether you attended a group meeting or a one-to-one, you'll very likely come away from every meeting with action items, tasks, and projects that you need to work on. Part of the success of future meetings will depend upon your success in completing your action items. This means that if you can come to every meeting and show the other participants that you keep your commitments and you meet your deadlines, then you'll earn their trust. They'll learn they can count on you, and they'll likely give you greater respect in the workplace.

Now, just a comment to go along with that idea: when you complete an item that comes out of a meeting, report back; send an email or a note to the person you committed to and let them know that it's done. Now if you completed it just before the next meeting, of course, you can report back in the meeting itself. But it's usually helpful to other people to let them know the moment you've completed a commitment. Every time you do that, it relieves a small burden off their mind, so they don't have to wonder if you got it done.

Complete your commitments and those you work with will feel a great sense of trust, that whatever they give you, you'll get it done on time.

## Following up on action items delegated to others

When you participate in group meetings and one-to-one meetings you'll very likely be asking other people to help you out. While they'll likely do a great job of completing those assignments on time, we want to take responsibility on ourselves to follow up with them. So keep this rule in mind: whenever you delegate something out, create a waiting-for-in for yourself. Think of delegation like a yo-yo. Whenever someone else commits to do something for you, you should also create an action for yourself that you're waiting for them to do it.

Create a reminder with the time and date they committed to get that to you. You can create reminders for yourself in your calendar or your task list. When the reminder pops up, follow up with that person and ask if the item is complete. If you haven't heard from them yet, simply send them a message along the lines of, "I had a reminder that I was waiting for that report - have you had a chance to get to it yet?" Or when the reminder pops up, if you know that they've already completed the item, you can send them a message such as, "Thank you for getting that report done - it makes my job easier." Little compliments like that not only help everyone feel better, but they reinforce a culture of follow-through in the workplace.

Another way to follow up on delegated items that have flexible deadlines is to add a follow-up reminder to a group list or a one-to-one task list. For instance, if Alice commits to me that she'll send out a series of emails in time for our next one-to-one meeting, then all I really need to do is create a reminder in my one-to-one Alice list to follow up with her about those emails. Then when I go to the meeting, as I go through that list, I can see that in the list and then ask Alice about it.

Remember, a delegate-out is always a waiting-for-in. Whenever you ask someone else to do something for you, be sure to consistently follow up with them. This will create a culture of making and keeping commitments.

## Reassessing the effectiveness of meetings

If you follow the suggestions of this course, the effectiveness of your meetings should improve. However, we want to make sure that your meetings are getting better each and every time. The best way to do that is to establish a schedule to continually reassess the effectiveness of your meetings. A great starting schedule is once per quarter or once every three months. Take part of your meeting to ask each attendee the question, "are these meetings effective?" You could possibly do this during the development portion of the scheduled meeting.

Along with this question, you can ask the follow-up question: "what could we do to improve the effectiveness of these meetings?" By regularly checking in, you'll give yourself the opportunity to make small improvements and adjustments over time.

## Final thoughts

In this course, we've given you a framework you can use in any company to make meetings more productive and focused on results. The most important principle of any meeting is that it gets the results that you want. I'd recommend that every attendee creates a schedule to regularly review this course on lynda.com. Review this course twice per year, or even once per quarter, and you'll sharpen your meeting skills and pick up on things that you may have missed the first time around.

Meetings exist to serve you and your business, not the other way around. Make an effort to regularly improve the quality of your meetings and you'll see them become more and more effective and accomplish great results for you and your co-workers. Thank you for watching and happy meeting!
